Hi, my name is Robert Bowdidge,
and I'm a member of Apple's
Developer Tools Group.
And today I'm going to talk about
Murphy's Law Revisited or Apple's
Performance Tools for Mac OS X,
and hopefully we're actually
going to have a demo.
So the first question,
or the way I'd like to start this,
is why are you all here?
Why should you actually care
about performance tools,
especially today?
Well, it turns out that with
the changes in Mac OS X,
this is a perfect time to
be very concerned about the
performance of your applications.
We're all working on a new operating
system where the libraries that we're
used to are now working on different
system routines and may not behave the
way that we're used to them behaving.
As a result,
we need to actually take a look at
our apps and decide whether the system
calls and the library calls that we
used to be doing actually have the
same performance that they used to,
whether there's any changes in their
semantics and what operations they do,
whether there's changes
in how they behave.
In addition,
some of the algorithms we may
have chosen in the past may no
longer work as well in Mac OS X.
And here's three examples
that actually come out of some
of my experience at Apple.
The first one is the difference
in how the heap is done.
For example, in Mac OS X,
we no longer have fixed-sized heaps.
Instead, the heap will expand
as far as it needs to,
as long as you keep allocating memory.
As a result,
the idea of allocating memory and
then setting the purgeable bit
doesn't make sense anymore because
the operating system is never going
to bother to purge this memory.
There was one case in the Finder,
actually, where they were loading
in the background image.
They would load the compressed
image into a buffer,
then they would uncompress
it into another buffer,
and then they had a third
copy for--as a working copy
that was marked as purgeable.
And the idea was that if
the memory was ever needed,
that copy would get blown away
and it could be recreated easily.
On Mac OS X,
at least two of these buffers
weren't really necessary.
The idea of the purgeable
case didn't really make sense
because it was never going away.
And the copy that was on the
version of the file on disk wasn't
needed to be copied into memory
because we have memory mapped files.
And so with cases like that,
you need to worry about exactly
what your app's doing with memory.
Similarly, the case of pulling--.
The case of pulling is much more
expensive on a multitask operating
system than when you're only expecting
one application to really be taking
control of the CPU at a time.
If you're sitting around
looking out on the network,
looking on the file system
for a file to appear,
waiting for the mouse to move,
those are cycles that are being
used by the CPU that can't be
used for other applications.
And so you don't want to pull
on Mac OS X because you're going
to drag down the performance of
all the other things that might
be running in the background.
And finally, because we're no longer
operating in a single disk,
we're operating in a
single address space,
the idea of inter-process communication
becomes a bit more difficult.
We can't just sort of pass a
pointer and provide another app a
sneaky way to look into our memory.
Instead,
we need to explicitly use one of the real
IPC mechanisms such as Mach messaging or
TCP/IP or we need to use shared memory.
Or we actually need to map memory into
both processes using the Mach underlying
virtual memory mechanisms.
In addition, many of the tools that we're
used to using may no longer work
or may not make sense anymore.
A good example of this
is Even Better Bus Error.
This is a quick and dirty tool that
will basically make sure that your app
is not writing or reading from address
zero by putting a bogus value there.
On Mac OS X,
this is not necessary anymore because
the operating system by default
makes sure that for every task,
the first page of memory
ends up being non-readable,
non-writable.
If your application tries
to read or write to it,
boom, it crashes.
You get an immediate feedback
that you're doing something badly.
Isn't that nice?
In other cases,
there's new tasks that may be necessary.
There's other cases such as
understanding about purgeable and
non-purgeable that no longer matter.
You need to understand
different sets of tools.
Hopefully,
what you'll learn today are some
ideas about what tools are out
there and perhaps what tools are
necessary as some ideas about third
party things that can be filled in.
So, as an overview,
I'm going to start out by talking
about two classes of tools.
The first set of tools are a set
of Unix-like command line tools
that give you information about
the low level state of the system.
The second set of tools are some
graphical and exploratory tools
that actually give you a higher
level understanding about how
your application is running.
Some of these may be familiar to you,
such as MallocDebug or Sampler.
For each tool,
I'm going to try to give you a little
bit of background about how it's used,
what its purpose is,
and also hopefully give you enough
excitement to make you want to go off and
try these on your own and explore them.
For each of them,
I'll also try to give some of the
details about how you interpret
its data and how to use it to
actually analyze your system.
However, this is going to be a survey.
There's just not enough time to really
go into depth about what's going on.
And so, hopefully this will at least spur
you to explore and ask questions.
Finally, there's two other themes
I'm going to try to cover.
One is the use of the
Unix-like command line tool.
The other is the use of the
Unix-like command line try to
keep going through as I talk.
The first one is that I want to tell
you a little about how you might try
to approach performance problems.
These won't be at a very high level,
but hopefully these will be some tricks.
The second issue I'm going to try to
do is give you some little hints about
performance problems that I've seen,
such as what I talked
about on the last slide.
Once again, I'm not going to be able
to go into detail on these.
If you're looking for specific details
about how to make your calls to,
let's say, core foundation more
efficient or the Carbon,
talking to the people who are
responsible for those libraries,
going to those sessions,
such as the core graphics session
yesterday or some of the Carbon sessions
or the core foundation sessions,
will give you more ideas about some
of the obvious things you should be
doing to make your app more efficient.
So Scott, how are we doing?
OK, so let's start off with
command line performance tools.
How many of you have experience--
have actually used Unix?
Good.
Most of you actually will have a leg up.
How many of you think the command
line tools are the work of the devil?
OK.
Thank you, Scott.
Well, actually, there's some very good
reasons to have these.
The first one,
the tools that we have here are
basically meant to be quick and
dirty tools to give you information
about the state of your machine.
And there's three really good
reasons why you want to use them.
The first one is that
they're minimally invasive.
That is, when you actually use these
to analyze your system,
you're going to get more of an idea
about how your system or how your
application is behaving on your computer,
as opposed to how the tool is
actually affecting how your
app runs on the computer.
The second thing is that because
all these are command line tools,
that means you can
actually run them remotely.
If you don't want to upset the screen,
if the machine is hung,
you can log in via telnet and
you can run these commands
and find out what's going on.
And finally,
because all of the command line tools are
basically just text-based applications,
you can use any of the
UNIX filter commands to convert
the data into a format you like.
If you want to see, let's say,
every 10 seconds how much memory
your application is using,
you could easily write a little script
that goes around and every 10 seconds
pulls one of the tools to actually
find out how much memory is being used.
And so in this way,
you can sort of roll your own without
having to do anything too deep.
The first tool that I list
here is actually PS,
which is a standard UNIX tool.
It stands for Process Status.
It gives you information about what
processes are running on the machine.
It tells you about how much
memory is used and so on.
I'm not actually going to talk about that
because it ends up--because there's some
other things that might be more useful.
Okay, so let's take a look first at TOP.
TOP is something that you can
use instead of PS to find out
about the state of your system.
It's actually something that
comes--there's some implementations on
top on other Unix like operating systems.
This one was specifically written by us.
And what it does, as you can see,
is it gives you a list of the processes,
ranked in basically
newest to oldest order.
At the top it gives you information
about the status of the system.
It starts out saying
what the load average is,
what the average number of
runnable tasks happens to be.
It tells you about how
many processes there are,
how much memory,
the line starting with memory
shows you how much memory is wired,
that is dedicated to
uses of the kernel only.
The second line shows you
how much memory is active,
inactive, blah, blah, blah.
Below that you can see how
much virtual memory there is.
There's currently 688 megabytes of
memory allocated to virtual memory.
Not all that may actually
have memory in it,
but that's how much the virtual
memory system thinks it has.
In addition,
it shows how many pages have been
put out to disk and brought back
in with the page ins and page outs.
And the number in parentheses--
The number in parentheses
there is important because
that's actually a delta.
That shows you how many pages
have changed in the last second.
Why don't we run QuickTime Player so we
actually get something interesting here.
And what we'll do is we'll
simply run QuickTime Player.
And let's think of a
hypothetical problem.
Let's assume that we're working on
the player and we're finding that the
frame rate doesn't seem high enough.
And we're not sure whether
we're correctly throttling
it down for some reason or if
we're not getting enough CPU.
This is actually not a
problem as far as I know,
but it's a good story.
So what we can see here is on the
second line you see LaunchCFMApp.
Here's a bit of trivia.
The QuickTime Player is
actually a PEF executable.
It's in the same format that
you would have seen on Mac OS 9.
And as a result,
whenever you try to execute
one of those on Mac OS X,
the LaunchCFMApp serves as a wrapper
to actually load that into memory.
And so that's why you don't
actually see QuickTime Player in
the list of processes.
And what we can see is that the
QuickTime Player is using about
25 to 30 percent of the CPU.
We get the elapsed time,
the number of threads,
the number of Mach ports,
which is an abstraction for
communicating between the kernel
and the system and the application.
Other interesting things
include the RPrivate,
which is the amount of private memory,
memory that is only for this particular
running version of the application.
That's different from all the memory
that's needed that can be shared between
multiple copies of QuickTime Player if
we had multiple ones running or other
applications using the same libraries.
So the RPrivate is a good
measure of how much memory your
application is using right now.
and our shared shows how much memory is
being used for the application itself,
which can be shared,
and all the libraries
and memory mapped files,
and all those things that aren't
only dedicated to one application.
Now, we can look at this and we can say,
gee, we're only using about
a third of the CPU.
What's going on here?
Are we spending too much time on disk?
Are we throttling?
Well,
one thing we can do is we can look down
the list and we can understand whether
our application is doing anything bizarre
that depends on the rest of the system.
And in this case, there certainly is.
We see at the bottom, actually,
and a lot of people probably, well,
can everyone see the
line starting with 50,
WindowMan?
Never mind, I'll just read it out.
Down towards the bottom,
there's a line that says "50,
window manager." It's
using about 20% of the CPU,
it's run for about 51 seconds and so on.
What's happening here is that the
window manager is actually responsible
for doing the drawing to the hardware.
And so all the applications end
up talking to the window manager.
And so it's not too surprising to see
execution divided between the two,
because the QuickTime player
is spending some of its time
getting all the images ready,
it's shipping them off to the window
manager and then the window manager
blasts them up on the screen.
So we're seeing that
we're spending about 50,
60% of the CPU actually doing meaningful
computation and filling up the CPU.
What's happening with
the rest of the time?
Well, there's some other
tools that we could do.
Let's go on the hypothesis that maybe
there's something going on with the disk.
There's another tool, and before I end,
one of the nice things about
Top is that it has a little bit
of a different type of tool.
It's called the "Top" tool.
And it's a little bit more
complex than the "Top" tool.
It's a little bit more
But what it does is that it
has a huge number of extra
modes and features hidden.
Please check the man page.
There's probably some view that's
perfect for a performance problem
you're trying to track down.
But I'm not going to show them all.
If we're trying to go to the file system,
though,
and understand how we're using that,
there's another command
that might be useful.
And that's called "fsusage".
With "fsusage" we name either--name
an application or we name a process.
And we hit return.
Actually, just do--let's just do a
little quick time play,
or actually do everything.
Well,
what we're going to do is we're going
to get a huge amount of information,
and if Scott hits the space bar,
we'll start seeing it.
And what you're seeing here are all the
accesses to the disk that are going on.
So you're actually seeing the
file system calls being performed.
And we can see what was being done,
like read or write, or page ins,
page outs, doing the status of a disk,
that sort of thing.
We find out how much time was
elapsed and whether it actually had
to give up the CPU to another task
to let that transaction finish.
And the application responsible.
If Scott actually widens that window,
we'll get some more information.
We'll know exactly which file handle
was accessing that and how many...
There we go.
It'll actually say what file handle it
was in the process and how many bytes.
And what we can see here is that the
QuickTime player is getting chunks
of 16,000 bytes or 32,000 bytes.
And we don't see any cases where
it's having to wait too long.
So that probably means we're not
having to do anything too weird
with the disk and we're not waiting
for stuff to come off the disk.
Maybe.
Another thing that we could
check out is we could ask about
how the memory is laid out.
Are we using a lot of
malloc space and the like?
Or just if we were curious
about how applications are
laid out in memory in Mac OS X,
we might want to have some sort
of a tool for visualizing that.
And there's another command
line tool called VM Map.
And what we can do is name VM Map.
We can specify the process ID.
or the name of the task,
and VM map will give us a listing of all
the regions of memory where they start,
how much space they are.
It'll actually start off telling us only
the readable regions or the non-writable,
and then it will tell us the
writable ones at the end.
And what we can see here of interest is
on the first line we see a symbolic name,
page zero.
We see a starting address, which is zero.
It's four kilobytes.
Then we see the permissions,
which is in the Unix style octal.
And everybody knows how I had a redactal,
of course.
Oh my.
Saying that page zero is
actually zero slash zero,
which means that it's non-readable,
non-writable.
That's the thing that's saving
us from doing page zero accesses.
If you try to dereference a pointer
which actually has the value 12,
you'll know about it.
You'll be able to catch
those immediately.
You're not going to have to worry about
strange memory corruptions and the like.
Below that we can see the
application starting at address 1000.
There's a couple places that
are cut off with the RD,
which are guard pages, which are, again,
non-readable,
non-writable pages at the end of
stacks for the various threads,
so that if you fill the stack,
it's not going to crash the system,
or it's not going to trash memory,
it's simply going to
crash when it hits that.
and you can see all the libraries
starting at address 4130 and going down.
And you can see the names of the
files that are being loaded as
libraries along the right hand side.
If this is too small, don't worry,
try it at home.
Hopefully it will make perfect sense.
If we go down a little further,
we'll actually see the writable regions.
And here we can start seeing things
like the malloc allocated regions.
And so we can find out which
pages malloc was placed at.
And most of the malloc
buffers were actually placed
right below the application.
Another tool that might be useful
is we might be asking ourselves,
well,
is the application running slow because
we're doing some obnoxious system
call that's just hanging forever?
And there's another tool called SC Usage.
and what SC Usage will do is it's
going to look for all the Mach system
calls going down into the kernel.
It will tell us how fast or which
ones we were calling off and
how much time we were spending.
What you can see here is some information
about how often the app got preempted,
how often the CPU gave
execution time to somebody else.
We can find
The second section shows us
how much time we spent idle and
how much time we spent busy.
What we're seeing there is that we're
spending a lot of our time in user
mode running the application and a
fair amount of time waiting in the app,
probably because we're doing
a lot of disk accesses.
Below that, we find the most popular
system calls being done,
and we find we're actually spending
a lot of time on semaphore wait
and Mach message overwrite trap.
Okay, you might say, gee, that's weird.
Maybe we're locked on a semaphore.
That's a very good guess.
Unfortunately,
it's not completely true because on
a lot of applications on Mac OS X,
there will be usually one or two
threads that are basically waiting
for something really bad to happen.
They've sent a message
off to the system saying,
let me know when something bad happens.
And they just sit there on
Mach message overwrite trap,
which is send off a message,
overwrite the buffer when it comes back,
wait until we get a message back.
And nothing ever comes back,
and so they're constantly waiting.
So understanding that those are
having huge wait times doesn't
necessarily buy us anything.
However, in some cases,
understanding we're spending lots of
time doing semaphore signals may tell us
something about how our app's running,
that we're spending too much
time actually waiting on
critical sections or something.
Let's see, what else do we want to show?
I guess that's about it.
Okay,
so those are the command line tools.
Everyone who had covered their heads
because they were afraid of them can now
come back up because we're actually going
to look at things that look nice and
that don't use any nasty technologies.
So the next thing I'm going
to show you are some graphical
tools that tend to give you a
little higher level information.
They don't give you quite the immediacy,
but hopefully will help you
understand what's going on.
The first of these is called MallocDebug,
and the point of MallocDebug is
to help you understand how your
application is using heap memory.
So what it does is for every
allocation that your app is doing,
it will keep track of how
much memory was created,
where that memory was created,
and will give you a way of seeing what's
currently allocated in the system.
It's really good for
answering questions like,
how much heap memory is
my application using?
Am I using 500K?
Am I using 10 megabytes?
Are there any places where I'm
using large chunks of memory?
Am I allocating 3 megabyte chunks
for some array that I don't realize?
Are there places where I'm
overrunning or underrunning buffers,
preparing,
trying to trash somebody else's memory,
which is a great way to
make subtle memory bugs?
Are there cases where
I might be leaking memory,
where I'm allocating things
but forgetting to free them?
So the first thing I'm going to
show you is a little bit of a graph.
So I'm going to show you a graph
of the memory that I'm allocating.
And then I'm going to show you a graph
And then I'm going to show
you a graph of the memory
In all cases,
what Malloc is going to try to do is give
you information about how you're creating
memory using Malloc as the core idea.
And unlike some other
tools you might be using,
what it does is it tries to
give you a snapshot of how much
memory you're using right now,
as opposed to showing you memory that
you'd allocated before that's been freed,
for example.
So it's only a snapshot.
The way MallocDebug does
this is kind of cool.
What it does is it has its own version
of Malloc that's been instrumented,
and it slides that version of
Malloc under your application
when you launch it.
And as a result,
it makes it very easy to use.
You don't have to worry about
recompiling your code to make sure
that this new library is used.
You don't have to change any source.
You don't have to do anything.
It just works.
And that's one of the
advantages of these tools.
In addition, because we have our
own version of Malloc,
what we can do is when Malloc is called,
we can actually keep track of
the call stack and find out
how you actually got there.
And because every other
allocator in the system,
whether that's in core foundation,
whether that's in Carbon,
whether that's in Objective C,
all of those eventually
go through Malloc.
So this is a single point to actually
find out how you're allocating memory.
So let's do a demo here.
So here's the MallocDebug window.
So Scott can either select the
application by pressing the Browse
button and going through a browser,
or can choose it off a drop-down list.
He can then press Launch to
actually start it up.
Okay, and why don't we update it to
see what the current status is.
And we find that in this case
we're launching simple text.
We find that we're actually allocating
about 700K to get to the point where
we've actually started the application.
and what we see in the window
below is basically a call tree.
It shows us all the
ways that we got down,
or that we ended up
going to malloc_debug,
or calling malloc.
So for example,
from start we called underbar start
and eventually we got down to main
after going through some system stuff.
Main called malloc through
about four functions,
either calling init_cursor or
do_initialize or do_event_loop or
some strange hexadecimal value there.
Actually,
let's go through that hexadecimal thing.
So 4110 is actually
another little secret.
As you may know,
411 is information and this
actually is the place where you
go to load dynamic libraries.
That's where you get information
about how to call other functions.
Cute, huh?
So what happens is that when
your application launches,
it tries to load all these other
libraries and as a result it has
to call the initialization routines
for each of these libraries.
So if you look down
inside that call domain,
that implicit call that you didn't
actually have to make in your code,
the initialize_highlevel_toolbox,
initialize_quickdraw,
initialize_carbon_core all
happened automatically.
We noticed that they actually
allocated about 400K.
So a good deal of the memory that was
allocated during launch was actually
in these initialization routines.
Now going from the top down
is sometimes interesting,
especially when you know your code,
but sometimes it's interesting to see
why or how you got down to Malloc and
what was happening down at the other end.
We can not only show
the tree from this side,
but we can also invert it,
and we can change the style of the tree.
And so now what we're doing is,
rather than looking at how we
got from Maine and called down
through the program down to Malloc,
we're going to look at Malloc
and we're going to look at the
ways that Malloc was called.
So for example, if we select Malloc.
These are the ways
that Malloc was called.
AllocateMemory called Malloc,
AddUsage called Malloc,
GlobalCacheAllocate called Malloc.
And for each of these,
we can get some idea about
how Malloc was called.
Let's go through one little example here.
Actually, let's do the Valloc one.
It's too bad we didn't actually
have the better example,
but this will do.
We can select Valloc and we see
that we actually have a 65,000 byte
chunk that was allocated through
one of the calls down that way.
And Valloc was called by allocate memory,
which was called by
allocate zeroed memory,
which was called by new handle.
I would prefer to have a
better example than this,
but this one will do.
Here's another little bit of trivia.
What's happening here
is that in Mac OS X,
when you create a new handle and
create the memory attached to that,
handles are actually suballocated.
There's actually a big block
of space that's been subdivided
into handle size spaces.
And somebody's got to create that memory.
So what happens is the first
time that you call new handle,
it actually goes and creates
the suballocated field.
So that 64K chunk is the
place for handles to live.
May not make sense,
it's a system level idea,
but the idea is that we can actually
track down from this call graph
what the point of that memory was,
especially if you're looking at
your own code and not looking at
the innards of the memory manager.
What we can also do is we can actually go
to something a little simpler like Calic.
and why don't you select one
of the buffers down below.
No, actually, yeah, select a buffer.
So, you also get a list of
all the allocations.
So,
not only do you find how you got there,
but you find a list of the buffers that
were allocated by calling down that way.
It'll tell you the address
that it was allocated at,
the size, and so on.
And if we double click on it,
we get a memory dump.
So, we can actually look at memory.
This is really useful.
If you find that you're allocating 6,000
bytes somewhere and you're curious why,
now you can double click on it and
take a look and try to understand
why that memory was allocated.
Now, one other thing that you can do,
actually press the back button, and
is, as I said, actually,
can we run the leaked example?
So one of the other things that
you can do with MallocDebug,
as I mentioned,
is that you can actually do a bit
of analysis to find cases where
you overran or underran buffers.
And these are really nasty bugs
because they tend to be intermittent,
they tend to be really subtle,
they tend to only occur after the
program's been running for a while
and then suddenly it crashes.
And so you'd like to track these down.
What MallocDebug does,
and you can do update and
then let's do an inverted,
or actually go to trashed.
is you can change the mode
from showing all the currently
allocated regions to only showing
what are called the trashed ones.
And if Scott actually selects Start,
we see that there's two
buffers that are trashed.
That is where the--where we
know we overran or underran it.
And the way we know that is we
actually have some guard words on each
side and when those get overwritten
we know that we did something bad.
If Scott actually double
clicks on one of those,
you can see the ten bytes,
the ten zeroes.
Malloc debug then--what it does
is when it allocates space,
it puts two special
strings at either side.
It puts the hex value beef dead
at the back end of the buffer
and then if Scott presses back,
you'll see that it puts
dead beef at the beginning.
and the last word down at the bottom.
And so when those words change,
MallocDebug knows you've
done something bad.
It actually also,
in an extremely user-friendly fashion,
ends up putting a message
out to the console,
yes, we need to fix this.
But it will actually give you some
indications of when it actually
notices that something gets trashed.
So keep the console window
open if you can when you run
MallocDebug so you can see this.
In addition,
let's try leak analysis next.
There's also the idea of leak analysis.
For those of you who
have used ZoneRanger,
ZoneRanger has an idea about leaks.
What it considers a leak to be is any
memory that you allocate but then don't
deallocate in some operation that should
have actually been cleaned itself up.
For example, opening a document and
closing the document.
If you have more memory than
you--if you have more memory
allocated than you started out with,
you've probably got a leak.
MallocDebug goes off the definition
that's more like Purifies,
that any memory that's not--that cannot
be reached by a pointer probably can't
be referenced and therefore it is leaked.
And so we go with that definition.
And the way you can do leak detection
is that you can start it up and you
can change the selection mode to leaks.
And what it does is MallocDebug will
now scan through memory looking for
anything that looks like a pointer.
And if it's a pointer,
it goes and it sees whether
that's a pointer or not.
And it's a pointer to the
beginning of a malloc region or to
a handle which points to a memory
region or a couple other options.
And if it does find a pointer like that,
it marks the block as reachable.
If it doesn't find it,
then it says it's not reachable
and it's probably a leak.
And after a little while,
it comes back and it shows us
only these--the allocations
that would have been leaked.
And what we can see here if
Scott goes down a little further or
actually go from the inverted side.
is we find about 182,000 bytes.
This is not completely true unfortunately
because there's a few cases of false
positives in system routines and let
me just step through a couple of them.
The calls to malloc from the global
cache allocate which are from
ATS alloc are cases in the font code
and this is a case where they're
doing some interesting things with
pointers that this doesn't detect.
And we can basically ignore those out.
Yes, this is ugly.
There's an internal version I hope
to roll out at Apple real soon now,
like in the next week,
to get around this problem.
It didn't make it on the CD.
Hopefully we can put it on the website.
But for now,
hopefully this will give you some hints
on how you can actually look at this
stuff and then laugh at me every time.
So we can select global cache
allocate and we can say,
okay, this is immaterial.
Let's select the prune menu,
the path item and we can pull that
out so we don't have to look at it.
So we're only looking at the
things we think to be leaks.
Similarly,
the allocation with new block turns
out to be a case in icon services.
Prune that out.
The case in malloc.
is the handles.
We can prune that out.
It will be better in the future, yes.
And eventually, you get down to the point
where the only things left are
things that are probably leaks.
There's some documentation
on this in the release note.
Like I said,
we'll have a better version that
will do this a little better.
But this is a way to start looking for
memory that might not be reachable.
And if you find memory that you allocated
in your application that's leaked,
this is probably a good indication
that you might have a problem.
Okay, let's move on.
Hmm?
Well, that's probably a good idea.
How are we doing on time?
So one of the things that's
really nice about ZoneRanger's
idea is this idea of you allocate
memory or you create an object,
you destroy it, and hopefully the amount
of memory doesn't change.
That idea is really nice
for understanding the effect
of certain operations.
We can do something similar to that.
What you can do is you can say,
let's say we're having a slow down
when we start typing in simple text
and we're curious why that's happening.
So we can try to see if we're doing a
lot of allocations or a lot of work.
What we can do is we can select,
go back to all, or actually that's fine.
What we can do is mark a point
in time by pressing mark.
We can then go and type into
the buffer to do the event
that we're trying to watch.
And then what we can do is go over to
MallocDebug and we can change to the,
show only the new nodes,
show only the newly allocated memory.
And we'll find,
after a moment.
Did we actually press mark?
Oh there we go.
We find that we allocated 400,000 bytes.
Oh my gosh what are we doing?
Actually there's a good reason for this.
But it's a great example.
If Scott actually,
actually we should go to
standard for this one because
it's an easier way to see.
This is why it's exploratory.
You have to sort of
dash around and explore.
And it makes it an
interesting thing to demo.
What we end up finding is
that most of that memory,
if we descend down the biggest path,
is inside called voices thread.
And what's actually happening
here is that simple text has
been voice enabled so that it
actually can do text to speech.
And so what happens is that
to speed up the load time,
which is something good that you should
care about for performance of course.
That was one of those
performance minutes.
In order to speed that up what
you want to do is you want to
make sure that you do as little as
possible when you're launching the
app and maybe do the rest later.
And this is the case
where they're doing that.
The they don't bother to actually
load the voices until a few seconds
after the windows actually appear.
And one of the things that they have
to do is load in the voices and do
all the data structures to make sure
that text to speech actually works.
So that's okay that it's delaying things.
And that's a cute trick to actually
improve the performance of your apps.
Thank you very much.
Let's go through a few little moments.
One thing I'll point out is the idea of
the call trees may be a little weird.
As I said,
the idea is that every time you
do a malloc allocation we get
sort of this call stack of all
the ways you got down to malloc.
They can be thought of as those vertical
lines on top or horizontal lines on top.
When you look at the normal tree,
what it does is it collapses together
all the things at the main end of the
tree to overlap the similarities so that
you can see how it starts to diverge.
And notice this is a tree so
we don't pull it back together
again at the other end.
Similarly, when you do the inverted tree,
we do the opposite.
We start collapsing things together at
the Malloc end to find the ways that
we called Malloc that were similar,
so we can start seeing where
things diverge from that end.
Also, to cover,
as another one of the little
issues we should probably cover,
just to explain MallocDebug,
there's also the question
of leak detection.
As I said,
the way that leak detection works
is it goes scanning through memory
looking for pointers to buffers
that are allocated by Malloc.
There are cases where the
leaks won't be noticed.
This is just part of the problem
with doing leak detection.
In some cases,
there may be a value in memory
that looks like a pointer.
You may have 5F000000 because
you've got a null terminated string.
In those cases, the
A random value and a pointer to
something that's actually a Malloc
buffer might not be distinguishable.
You can't tell why that
stuff was put into memory.
And as a result,
you might get cases where things that
are actually leaks may not be leaks.
Similarly,
there's some cases where there may
be leaks that don't get detected.
This garbage detection
algorithm is relatively simple.
Anyone who's played with them
should immediately see some holes.
One of those is that if you have a
list of circularly linked structures,
so you've got a big loop of things,
every object points to something else.
And therefore,
all of them are referenced,
and so they'll never
be detected as a leak.
Similarly,
a tree of data structures will only
have the root of it unreferenced,
and therefore you may only see,
let's say,
a 20-byte leak when you're actually
leaking a huge data structure.
So always pay attention to
even small leaks just in case.
Now,
I mentioned that there were a number of
problems with various system routines.
We're doing clever things with pointers.
In general,
what was happening is that our
definition of leak is that there's a
pointer to the beginning of a buffer.
And if there's a pointer to
the beginning of the buffer,
it's reachable.
However, in some cases, in your own code,
in others,
people will have pointers into the
middle of a buffer for various reasons
and no pointers to the beginning,
usually because they're trying to hide
secret information at the beginning.
In those cases,
MallocDebug is not going to be able
to do leak detection correctly.
The next version may help.
Another issue to keep in mind is
my favorite question or comment.
People constantly come to me and say,
"This tool is horrible.
I use it and all my application
ever does is crash."
This is actually the same problem that
people had with even better bus error.
You know, gee, every time I use this,
my machine crashes.
Why don't you write better software?
I love hearing that story
from the guy who wrote that.
But what's happening is that MallocDebug
is trying to tell you something.
It's trying to tell you
something extremely loudly.
You're doing bad things with pointers.
There are a number of cases of
operations that can cause subtle
and intermittent memory bugs.
Examples of those include overrunning
or underrunning buffers so you
trash somebody else's buffer,
or freeing memory and then continuing
to use it and modify the values even
though somebody else has now got that
memory and you're trashing their values.
MallocDebug tries to
solve both those problems.
The first thing it does is that
every time that you free memory,
it overwrites that memory with 7F
to make sure that there's absolute
garbage in there and that hopefully
if your app tries to read that,
you'll notice.
The second thing is that you saw
that overruns were guarded with dead
beef and underruns with beef dead.
And so if you end up
trying to access beyond,
you're going to get a bogus value also.
As a result, you may see your program
behaving strangely,
you may see odd values in
variables that shouldn't be there,
or you may find your application crashing
when trying to access address 7f,
7f, 7f, 7f.
When you get crashes on your app in
MallocDebug that don't happen normally,
the first thing to do is that
there is a preferences panel that
has the clear freed memory option.
Turn that off and try it again.
If your app runs, then you're doing bad
things with freed memory.
What you can then do is run
the program inside GDB using
MallocDebug's special library.
There's documentation on this
in the release notes and the
debugger will drop you off exactly
where you should pay attention.
And the final bit of information
about MallocDebug is questions
about taking its advice.
Once again, MallocDebug is primarily a
tool for exploring your data.
It's a really good tool for the
writer to actually look because
the writer understands their
own code and may be able to say,
"Gee, that's odd." There's still
uses for this in testing.
If you have cases where
you're leaking memory,
if you've got block
underruns or overruns,
or you're referencing freed memory,
that's a red flag that
there's something to be fixed.
In terms of exploring,
I can't give you very good
details about how to explore.
Basically,
go off and see what's out there.
See if you've got any
really big allocations.
See if you're allocating a lot of really
small things that you didn't expect.
Look for odd cases.
Look for patterns.
The best advice I can give you that's
really concrete is I tend to find it
much more useful to use the inverted
graph rather than the standard one.
But that may be because I tend to look
at the system libraries a lot more.
So, hopefully you'll find this useful.
The second tool that I'd like to
show is a tool called Sampler.
And you can think of this
as a really cheap profiler.
What Sampler does is every 20
milliseconds or every 50 milliseconds
it stops the program and it says,
hey, where are you running?
And it actually gets the call stack
for all of the threads that are
currently running so it knows the
current point that it's executing.
Like malloc.debug,
it provides basically the call
stack so that you can browse
through those and try to find out
exactly how things are running.
Um,
Now, the reason why Sampler is good is
that it's extremely easy to perform.
You use it, it works.
You don't need to recompile
your application like
you would with profiling.
You don't need to have special
profiled versions of libraries.
You don't need to make
any changes to the code.
It just works.
You can run this on any of the
applications on the system.
And in fact,
all these tools are on the CD,
so please go out and play with them.
And in addition,
because it's only stopping the program
every 20 milliseconds or 50 milliseconds,
hopefully it will be doing very little
to the application's running behavior,
as opposed to, let's say,
doing full profiling.
And so this may be a way to get really
cheap data to find performance problems
that should be explored in more depth.
I'll also point out, just in passing,
there's also a command
line tool called Sample,
where you just type sample and the
process ID or the application name
and how many seconds of sample.
And so this is a really
good tool for that.
And it's really good for
basically cutting and pasting
and putting into a bug report.
And it's really good for
basically cutting and pasting
and putting into a bug report.
And it will put out a text-based
report saying where it found
the program's execution.
This is really good if your
application hangs or if it seems slow,
so that you can actually track down
what the performance problem is.
And it's really good for
basically cutting and pasting
and putting into a bug report.
So let's do a demo.
Okay, so here's the Sampler UI.
Once again, we can select an application,
we can launch it,
and let's actually change the
sampling rate to 20 milliseconds.
And then we can launch and sample it
and we can see how simple text launches
and what's going on during that.
And so eventually the
window will come up.
There we go.
And we can stop sampling.
And now we get a set of call
stacks showing what's going on.
We'll start off with the extra threads.
So thread two, so there were 155 samples,
155 times where it stopped the program
that it found execution in thread two.
And all those were basically
in Mach message overwrite trap.
Okay, so it's basically sitting
there waiting for a message.
We can ignore that.
So we can actually add that
to excluded stacks down at the
bottom to get it out of our view.
Thread one's pretty much the same way,
except for about eight samples it's
basically sitting there doing nothing.
So we can ignore that one also.
And then in thread zero,
if we click on the 1000 and
start and start and main,
now we can start finding
out what was going on.
So we had 158 samples at 20 milliseconds.
That's, what, 10, 3 seconds.
Most of the time was being
spent in do event loop.
The wait next event is pretty trivial.
That's just when it's spinning,
so we can ignore that.
And the last six,
Samples were actually-- you
want to go down to that?
Actually,
you can see the call stack on the
far side showing the entire tree.
So you can see that we
were in doEventLoop,
which called handleEvent,
which called eventually
resume the current event.
So that was doing the setup for the app.
This is a relatively
uninteresting example.
Feel free to go off
and try your own code,
and hopefully you'll find some very
interesting things about how your app
is running and where it's finding it.
There's also a way that you can invert
the call graph so you can look from the
bottom up and you can find the common
functions that it found it running in.
If you find that your
functions are listed down here,
that probably means you have a tight loop
and you're spending all your time there.
Often you'll find that the application
is stopped in system calls when it
was sampled and that's why you're
seeing calls to string compare or to
Mach message overwrite trap and the like.
Okay,
there's one big caveat I should mention.
Although I've said that this
is a cheap method of profiling,
remember,
Sampler is not providing comprehensive,
accurate data.
It's sampling.
It's a statistical approach.
That means that it's not going
to show you all the calls
that are actually happening,
just the ones that were happening
when it decided to stop the app.
Second, the numbers refer to how many
times it found it in that function,
not how many times that
function was called.
If we found 150 samples in
some arbitrary function,
that could mean it was called 150 times,
it could mean it was called once,
but every time it looked it was in that,
or that function could have been
called 150,000 times and we just
happened to see it when it was in that.
If you're trying to get...
If you have small,
quick executing functions,
those are going to appear statistically
based on what percentage of the
time they actually take to execute.
So with longer sample runs
and smaller sample times,
you'll start getting better
data and you'll start seeing
the smaller functions appear.
In addition, because this is sampling,
there's the question of sampling error.
What are we going to see
when we stop the program?
Well, because the way Sampler works
is it takes control of the
CPU and the other process stops,
that means that the other application
is going to be at preemption points.
And so wherever the operating
system decides is a good time to
stop the thing is going to be where
you're going to see it in Sampler.
That could either be because it
ran out of time and the operating
system took control away,
or it could be because the
application made a system call
and the operating system said,
you're never going to
finish this in time.
I'm just going to give control
to someone else while you're
waiting for this disk access.
And so you may see disk accesses.
you may see some of the system calls much
more frequently than they really appear.
Okay, let's not worry about ObjectAlloc.
Actually, let's just demo it quickly.
So another tool that's
available is ObjectAlloc.
This is a tool that was originally
intended for Objective-C,
but still can be useful
for programming in Carbon,
for programming in Basics, in just C.
The idea is that this is trying
to be a lot more like ZoneRanger.
That it's trying to give you ideas
about how fast you're adding data,
how much data you're using,
how quickly it's increasing.
And what it does is it
shows you a histogram.
What it does is it divides
up all the allocations based
on the class of the object.
You can see how many
CFDictionary's you had,
how many NSStrings,
and in the case of just
plain malloc allocations,
it just says malloc-46 for
46 byte malloc allocations.
What the histograms show you is,
first for the darkest bar,
it shows you the current
number of objects of that
type existing in the system.
The next lighter represents the
maximum number of objects of this
type that ever existed at once,
and the final bar shows you how many
objects of that type have been allocated.
Watching this run can
give you an idea about,
in general,
how your app might be behaving and
might give you some hints about objects
that you're creating a huge number
of that might be performance problems.
There are some other features in this
and other features in the other tools.
Please go play with them.
Let's do one example here.
Let's talk about how we'd
actually debug something for real.
The example I'm going to
use is one of my own things,
so that I can be very embarrassed.
Specifically,
it's the MallocDebug leak detection.
What happened was that when
I actually implemented or added
support for Carbon memory,
I found that leak detection got much,
much, much, much, much slower,
about a 10 times slowdown.
This was very bad.
However, I'd only changed the
algorithm in small ways,
so I was extremely confused
about what was going on.
What I needed to do was I needed
to use multiple tools to understand
exactly what was going on.
This is something you're
probably going to find,
that you really need to play
around and look from different
angles to find out why something's
behaving less than optimally.
The first thing I did was I ran Sampler.
I had Sampler look at my
process when it was doing,
or at the application,
when it was doing the leak detection.
What I found was that most of
the time it was actually spending
in a call known as VM region,
which is a system-level call
that will tell you about
what parts of virtual memory,
for a specific process,
are actually mapped in,
which ones don't exist,
whether they're readable, writable.
This was important for
being able to identify,
when I was checking a pointer,
figuring out whether there
was anything at the other end,
so that I could read that
data without knowing that the
system was going to crash.
Actually,
the application was going to crash,
because the system won't crash in OS X.
Thank God.
The solution was that this
data didn't change during the
time I was doing analysis.
And so I found I could actually cache
that and I increased the speed by
about a third better than it was.
The second thing was that
I started listening to my machine.
I used my ears, another tool.
And I found that the
disk was chattering away.
Using Top,
I looked and I found that I was
swapping about 2,000 pages a minute.
So my machine was basically spending
all its time throwing pages out
to disk and bringing them back in.
This is not very efficient unless
you happen to be a disk drive.
And what I found was that although it was
spending all that time swapping around,
all the execution was
being spent in my code.
It wasn't doing other I/O.
It was just trying to swap.
And what it turned out to be after
commenting certain parts of the code
out was that I was checking for pointers
in places I shouldn't have been,
in places that were only readable
memory that you couldn't have
had reasonable pointers in.
And as a result,
I was searching for pointers in
places that I shouldn't have been,
in places that were only readable.
And as a result, I was searching around
in a lot of places.
And because of the change in algorithm,
suddenly I was looking at a lot
more pages in random places.
And instead of sort of linearly
passing through memory and
looking at only a few places,
I was looking everywhere randomly and
causing huge performance problems.
As a result,
what I was able to do was minimize
the number of out-of-order checks and
tighten up the checks on what I was
going to look at other pages for.
And as a result, got the speed up down to
about a factor of two.
And since then,
I've looked at my algorithm.
And I've gotten it down to
like only 10 seconds from 30,
which was pretty cool.
So the take-home lesson here
is plan to use lots of tools,
plan to explore lots
of parts of the system,
and plan to learn a lot of trivia.
Welcome to the world of performance.
For those of you that are
planning on porting from Carbon,
yes, we've heard great testimonials about
people who went off for lunch and
converted their app over to Carbon.
That's really good.
In fact, in a lot of cases that's
probably good enough.
However, as I gave you examples,
there may be places in your
code where there actually are
mismatches in the algorithms that
don't quite match the new world.
Porting is only going
to be half the work.
You're going to have to look at the app,
you're going to have to
understand how it works,
and see if you can find
any performance problems.
Plan on using these performance tools.
Plan on using multiple
tools and exploring,
as I mentioned before.
In addition,
remember that one of the things that
we're getting with Mac OS X is a huge
number of pieces of infrastructure
that are really going to help us out.
Plan on looking at them and
deciding what you can actually use.
Examples include memory mapped files.
You don't actually have to read
stuff from disk into a buffer.
The operating system will kindly just
map that file into virtual memory.
When you try to touch that page,
it will actually map
it into memory for you.
You don't actually need to
keep multiple buffers around.
In fact,
if you try to keep those buffers around,
you may be being too clever
because the operating system may
be keeping a copy of the memory
mapped file in your address space.
Suddenly, you've got two copies.
Similarly, we now have Pthreads,
a really nice thread implementation.
These are threads at the
level of the operating system.
They don't have a lot of overhead
because they're part of the OS.
Plan on looking at Pthreads and
seeing if you can exploit those.
Finally,
we also now have the POSIX file I/O.
There may be cases where that's
much more useful to you than
the standard Mac OS toolkit.
Take a look at that and see if that
will actually help you in some cases.
In addition,
a certain vice president who shall
remain nameless hacked on a few weekends.
Excuse me, let me rephrase this.
Certain people high in the company
happened to be very interested
in algorithms and happened to
be very interested in Malloc.
One of the problems on many
Mac OS compiler implementations
was that the Malloc implementations
used to be really bad.
And a lot of people have used
sub-allocators instead of going through
native memory management because they
want extra efficiency or they don't think
the performance is going to be that hot.
We have a really nice
implementation of Malloc thanks
to someone's nights and weekends.
So think twice about
using sub-allocators.
Try the new Malloc.
It's really efficient.
There's some really cool
new little features in it.
Go play.
And finally,
I will repeat again and again and again,
polling bad, blocking good.
Don't sit and wait for
something to happen.
Have the OS.
Go off and tell you when it's done.
Have the OS take control away from
you and give it to someone else so
that other processes can actually
run and you'll have a nice feeling
of smoothness all through the app
instead of having yours take up CPU.
And as a final warning,
in a horrible place,
some of these tools do
work with PEF binaries.
Some of them don't
necessarily work so well,
and we want to improve that.
With MallocDebug and Sampler,
they currently do not
identify the PEF symbols,
and so you're not going to see the
symbols in your own application.
If you're running Mac OS native binaries,
this isn't a problem.
This is something that
didn't get onto the CD.
Hopefully, we can actually put it out
on the developer website so
that everybody can use this.
But plan that the version on the CD may
not do a good job with PEF binaries,
that you may not be able to
see much about your program.
So, to conclude, Mac OS X is really cool,
but the differences between
it and how you use it to work
has a lot of differences.
The algorithms you use are
probably going to need to change,
so take a look at them,
use the performance
tools to analyze them,
and have a great time with
native Mac OS X applications.
If you have questions,
or actually if you want to use the tools,
they're in /usr/bin for
the command line tools.
The graphical tools are in
System Developer Applications.
Documentation is available as man
pages for the command line tools.
MallocDebug and Sampler
have documentation in them,
and there's also a nice release
note on MallocDebug explaining
some of its idiosyncrasies
for this particular release.
If you've got questions or feedback,
if you send mail to
macos10/tools/feedback,
it goes to, I believe, the entire group.
We'd love to hear your comments,
suggestions about other tools
that are really necessary,
because we're all going to
learn what's really needed
when moving over to Mac OS X.
And if you have any other issues,
Godfrey DiGiorgi is our technology
manager for the Development Tools Group,
and I will bring him up so that he
can tell you about the other forums.
Male #1: Oops.
Male #1: Group.apple.com.
Okay, we have about 12 minutes for Q&A,
so... Oops.
[Transcript missing]